[ZIP 233] Zcash Sustainability Fund (#703)
zcash/zips: draft-zsf.md

Owners: Jason McGee <jason@shieldedlabs.com>
        Mark Henderson <mark@equilibrium.co>
        Tomek Piotrowski <tomek@eiger.co>
        Mariusz Pilarek <mariusz@eiger.co>
Original-Authors: Nathan Wilcox
Credits: Nathan Wilcox
         Mark Henderson
         Jason McGee
         Tomek Piotrowski
         Mariusz Pilarek
Status: Draft
Category: Ecosystem
Created: 2023-08-
License: BSD-2-Clause
```

# Terminology

The key words "MUST", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "MAY", "RECOMMENDED", "OPTIONAL", and "REQUIRED" in this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119. [1]

The term "network upgrade" in this document is to be interpreted as described in ZIP 200. [2]

The term "Block Rewards" refers to the algorithmic
issuance of ZEC to every block's creator -- part of the consensus rules.

"Issuance" - The method by which unmined or unissued ZEC is converted to ZEC available to users of the network

"We" - the ZIP authors, owners listed in the above front matter

"`MAX_MONEY`" is the ZEC supply cap. For simplicity, this ZIP defines it to be `21,000,000 ZEC`, although this is slightly larger than the actual supply cap of the original ZEC issuance mechanism.

# Abstract 

> This ZIP describes the motivation, the necessary changes for, and the implementation specifications for the Zcash Sustainability Fund (ZSF). The ZSF is a proposed alteration to the block rewards system and accounting of unmined ZEC that allows for other sources of funding besides unissued ZEC. This new mechanism for deposits -- that new applications or protocol designs can use to strengthen the long-term sustainability of the network  -- will likely be an important step for future economic upgrades, such as a transition to Proof of Stake or Zcash Shielded Assets, and other potential protocol fees and user applications.
> 
> The changes in this ZIP are ultimately minimal, only requiring for the node to track state in the form of a `ZSF_BALANCE`, and for a new transaction field to be added, called `ZSF_DEPOSIT`. While wallet developer would be encouraged to add the `ZSF_DEPOSIT` field to their UIs, no changes or new behavior are absolutely required for developers or ZEC holders.
> 
> # Motivation
> 
> The Zcash network's operation and development relies fundamentally on the block reward system inherited from Bitcoin. This system currently looks sometihng like this:
> 
> - At Every New Block:
>     - Miner rewarded via unissued ZEC
>     - Transaction fees `(inputs - outputs)`
> 
> The Zcash Sustainability Fund is a proposed replacement to that payout mechanism, with the relevant parts in *bold* below:
> 
> - **Unmined ZEC is now accounted for as `ZSF_BALANCE`**
> - **Transaction includes optional contributions to ZSF via a `ZSF_DEPOSIT` field**
> - Thus, at Every New Block:
>     - Miner still rewarded **from `ZSF_BALANCE`**

Reviewer: We think it would be helpful to clearly specify that issuance doesn't change in this ZIP.

```suggestion
This ZIP describes the motivation, the necessary changes for, and the implementation specifications for the Zcash Sustainability Fund (ZSF). The ZSF is a proposed alteration to the block rewards system and accounting of unmined ZEC that allows for other sources of funding besides unissued ZEC. This new mechanism for deposits -- that new applications or protocol designs can use to strengthen the long-term sustainability of the network  -- will likely be an important step for future economic upgrades, such as a transition to Proof of Stake or Zcash Shielded Assets, and other potential protocol fees and user applications.

The changes in this ZIP are ultimately minimal, only requiring for the node to track state in the form of a `ZSF_BALANCE`, and for a new transaction field to be added, called `ZSF_DEPOSIT`. While wallet developer would be encouraged to add the `ZSF_DEPOSIT` field to their UIs, no changes or new behavior are absolutely required for developers or ZEC holders.

This ZIP does not change the current ZEC issuance schedule. Any additional amounts in the sustainability fund are reserved for use in future ZIPs.

# Motivation

The Zcash network's operation and development relies fundamentally on the block reward system inherited from Bitcoin. This system currently looks sometihng like this:

- At Every New Block:
    - Miner and funding streams rewarded a constant amount via unissued ZEC (this constant amount halves at specified heights)
    - Transaction fees `(inputs - outputs)`

The Zcash Sustainability Fund is a proposed replacement to that payout mechanism, with the relevant parts in *bold* below:

- **Unmined ZEC is now accounted for as `ZSF_BALANCE`**
- **Transaction includes optional contributions to ZSF via a `ZSF_DEPOSIT` field**
- Thus, at Every New Block:
    - Miner and funding streams rewarded the same constant amount, **but from `ZSF_BALANCE`** (this constant amount still halves at specified heights)
```

    - Transaction fees `(inputs - outputs)`, **including the `ZF_DEPOSIT` amount**

This design gives similar clarity and algorithmic control benefits, while also allowing other sources of funds for Block Rewards in addition to newly issued ZEC, via ZSF Deposits.

For example, an end-user wallet application could have an option to contribute a portion of a transaction to the ZSF, which would be included in a `ZSF_DEPOSIT` field in the transaction, to be taken into account by the Zcash nodes.

> This ZIP is explicitly agnostic as to the recipients of block rewards so that acceptance or adoption of the Sustainability Fund does not introduce or bundle reallocation decisions with the primary proposal.

Reviewer 2: If this ZIP is not changing issuance then it cannot affect the recipients of block rewards, so this sentence is then redundant.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

5. **Ecosystem Benefits of Longer Time Horizons:** A reliable and long-term functioning Zcash blockchain allows users to make secure long-term plans, leading to a sustainable and virtuous adoption cycle, rather than being influenced by short-term trends.
6. **Consensus Continuity During Lulls:** Rate-limited payouts from the Sustainability Fund help maintain blockchain security during periods of low activity by utilizing savings from high activity periods, whereas direct miner rewards tied to short-term activity may favor miners with significant savings reserves or access to credit, reducing mining competitiveness and overall ecosystem certainty about mining capacity.
7. **Mitigate Payment-to-Self Vulnerabilities:** The risk of miners benefiting from "spoofing" transactions and the desire for a fixed eventual supply goal lead to considering alternatives like the Sustainability Fund, which pays out fees over a long enough time horizon to prevent recouping costs, allowing Zcash to remain closer to its supply goal and offering an alternative to other protocol designs that destroy or burn funds.

> 8. **Recovery of "Soft-Burned" Funds:** In some instances, such as miners not claim all available rewards, some ZEC goes unaccounted for though not formally burned. This proposal would recover it through the `ZSF_BALANCE` mechanism described below.

Reviewer 2: The motivations should be cut down to those that apply specifically to this ZIP. If another ZIP redirects the ZSF funds, the motivations for doing that should be in that ZIP.

_Disclaimer 1: Long term success depends on the specific mechanisms of deposits, the quantities involved, and broader economic considerations. For such as if the payout rate is both sufficient and not excessive enough to threaten sustainability._

# Specification

In practice, The Zcash Sustainability Fund is a single global balance maintained by the node state and contributed to via a single transaction field. This provides the economic and security support described in the motivation section, while also importantly keeping the fund payouts extremely simple to describe and implement.

The two modifications are:
1. The re-accounting of unmined ZEC as a node state field called `ZSF_BALANCE`
2. The addition of a transaction field called `ZSF_DEPOSIT`

Please note that a **network upgrade is required** for this work to be fully implemented.

## `ZSF_BALANCE`

> Upon activation at height `H`, the ZEC issuance mechanism is permanently suspended, the value of `ZSF_BALANCE[H]` is set to the remainder of unissued ZEC. This must be done before the `Block Rewards Payout Rule` is enforced for the block at height `H`. **This is not a pre-mine.** This is simply a re-accounting of unissued ZEC that comes with the benefit of other possible sources of funding.

Reviewer 2: We believe this ZIP should not change issuance at all.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The ZEC issuance mechanism is re-defined to remove funds from `ZSF_BALANCE`, which is initially set to `MAX_MONEY`.
```

Consensus nodes are then required to track new per-block state:

- `ZSF_BALANCE[H] : u64 [zatoshi]`

The state is a single 64 bit integer (representing units of `zatoshi`) at any given block height, ``H``, representing the Sustainability Fund balance at that height, ``H``. The `ZSF_BALANCE` can be calculated using the following formula:

> `TOTAL ZEC TO EXIST (MAX_MONEY) - CLAIMED BLOCK SUBSIDIES OF PAST BLOCKS + SUM OF ALL ZSF DEPOSITS FROM PAST TRANSACTIONS`

Reviewer 2: This should be made absolutely precise:

`ZsfBalanceAfter(height) = MAX_MONEY + sum_{h = 0}^{height} (ZsfDeposit(height) + Unclaimed(height) - BlockSubsidy(height))`

where `Unclaimed(height)` is the portion of the block subsidy that is unclaimed for the block at the given height. (This can also be written more precisely but don't worry about that for now.)

> This formula holds for all future blocks. It is safe and semantically consistent to consider all blocks prior to the activation height to have a value of `0` in this field. This is not required by this proposal but may be convenient in designs or implementations.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This formula holds for all future blocks.
```

> 

Reviewer: TODO for the next ZIP editors meeting:

Do we want to add a commitment to the `ZSF_BALANCE` node state as part of either:
- The existing block history commitment `hashChainHistoryRoot`: https://zips.z.cash/zip-0221
- An additional separate block commitment `hashSustainabilityFund`: https://zips.z.cash/zip-0244#block-header-changes

```draft suggestion
Each block commits to the previous block's `ZSF_BALANCE` in the block header by (TODO for ZIP editors)
```

Reviewer 2: We looked through existing things that the block history commitment keeps track of, and it seems that we do not need to include it there. It would still be possible to use a FlyClient proof to prove that the sustainability fund balance has a particular value in a given block. The things that need to be explicitly included in the block history commitment are those that are useful to keep track of over a range, or that would improve light client security guarantees, which is not the case here.

Given that, it is more compatible to add this value to the end of the https://zips.z.cash/zip-0244#block-header-changes hash chain, because miners are required to be aware of extensions to this hash chain in any case. TODO: document guidelines for how to do that consistently.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The block at height `H` commits to `ZsfBalanceAfter(H)` as a new `hashSustainabilityFund` in the block header, at the end of the `hashBlockCommitments` chain in [ZIP-244](https://zips.z.cash/zip-0244#block-header-changes).

TODO ZIP editors: consider introducing a chain state commitment hash tree. When we get closer to the network upgrade, we will have a better idea what commitments that network upgrade needs.
```

### `ZSF_BALANCE` Requirements

- The value of `ZSF_BALANCE` SHOULD equal `0` for all blocks prior to the activation height `H`. 

> - The above described formula `TOTAL ZEC TO EXIST (MAX_MONEY) - CLAIMED BLOCK SUBSIDIES OF PAST BLOCKS + SUM OF ALL ZSF DEPOSITS FROM PAST TRANSACTIONS` MUST hold for all future blocks.

Reviewer 2: These are redundant given the above definition.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> - Future protocol changes MUST NOT reduce or redistribute the funds in the ZSF, and they may not increase the payout rate to a reasonable approximation beyond the four year half-life constraint.

Reviewer 2: A ZIP cannot constrain future protocol changes.

Also, isn't the intent exactly that the funds in the ZSF will be redistributed (in another ZIP)?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> ### `ZSF_BALANCE` Requirements
> 
> - The value of `ZSF_BALANCE` SHOULD equal `0` for all blocks prior to the activation height `H`. 
> - The above described formula `TOTAL ZEC TO EXIST (MAX_MONEY) - CLAIMED BLOCK SUBSIDIES OF PAST BLOCKS + SUM OF ALL ZSF DEPOSITS FROM PAST TRANSACTIONS` MUST hold for all future blocks.
> - Future protocol changes MUST NOT reduce or redistribute the funds in the ZSF, and they may not increase the payout rate to a reasonable approximation beyond the four year half-life constraint.
> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

> ## `ZSF_DEPOSIT`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Deposits into the Sustainability Fund

Sustainability fund deposits can be made by:
- Zcash fund holders, via a new `ZSF_DEPOSIT` field in non-coinbase transactions
- Zcash miners, via a new `ZSF_DEPOSIT` field in coinbase transactions

Unclaimed funds in older coinbase transactions are also re-defined as deposits into the sustainability fund.

### `ZSF_DEPOSIT` fields in transactions
```

Reviewer 2: TODO @daira: document the option of using a convention for unspendable outputs as sustainability fund deposits, and say why we prefer to use an explicit field.

> 

Reviewer: TODO for next ZIP editors meeting: suggest known unspendable transparent outputs as a source, or suggest making a separate ZIP for that, or decide not to make a suggestion at all.

Each transaction can dedicate some of its excess funds to the ZSF, and the remainder becomes the miner fee, with any excess miner fee/reward going to the ZSF

> This is achieved by adding a new field to all transactions:

Reviewer: The transaction header is present in all transactions, and each field is included exactly once.

```suggestion
This is achieved by adding a new field to the transaction header:
```

> - `ZSF_DEPOSIT : u64 [zatoshi]`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `zsfDeposit : u64 [zatoshi]`
```

> The `ZSF_BALANCE[H]` for a block at height `H` can be calculated given a value of `ZSF_BALANCE[H-1]` and the set of transactions contained in that block. First, the `ZSF_DEPOSIT[H]` is calculated based solely on `ZSF_BALANCE[H-1]`. This is subtracted from the previous block's balance to be distributed as part of the block reward. Second, the sum of all the `ZSF_DEPOSIT` fields of all transactions in the block is added to the balance.

Reviewer: TODO for the next ZIP editors meeting: suggestions for partially deleting and rewriting this paragraph.

Reviewer 2: I will rewrite this.

Reviewer 3: @daira any suggestion here?

> It is safe and consistent to treat older transactions using pre-Sustainability Fund formats as if they have this field implicitly present with a value of 0 where that simplifies designs or implementations.

Reviewer: This only applies to non-coinbase transactions:
(See below for the definition for coinbase transactions.)

```suggestion
It is safe and consistent to treat older non-coinbase transactions using pre-Sustainability Fund formats as if they have this field implicitly present with a value of 0 where that simplifies designs or implementations.
```

> Note: this field is not generally considered an "output" because it differs from other outputs in several significant ways:
> 
> - All `ZSF_DEPOSIT` fields contribute to a single global balance rather than a user-specific output state,
> - Consensus validation can account for this field by updating `ZSF_BALANCE[H]` and do not need to track any transaction field specific state after this accounting in contrast to e.g. UTXOs which must be tracked until spent.
> - This field does not contribute to the transaction graph of senders or recipients whether transparent or protected by cryptography.

Reviewer: Outputs (transparent outputs, shielded value balances, and the transaction transparent value pool) are already defined in the Zcash specification and ZIP 209, so there is no need to re-define them here.

However, there are existing consensus rules that manage miner fees:
> Transparent inputs to a transaction insert value into a transparent transaction value pool associated with the transaction, and transparent outputs remove value from this pool.
> As in Bitcoin, the remaining value in the transparent transaction value pool of a non-coinbase transaction is available to miners as a fee. ...
>
> Consensus rule: The remaining value in the transparent transaction value pool MUST be nonnegative.

https://zips.z.cash/protocol/protocol.pdf#transactions

So the specification needs an update to avoid sending ZSF funds to the miner fee:

```suggestion
### Consensus Rule Changes

- Transparent inputs to a transaction insert value into a transparent transaction value pool associated with the transaction. Transparent outputs **and ZSF_BALANCE** remove value from this pool.
```

> 

Reviewer: There is an existing coinbase transaction consensus rule which needs to be changed:

>  The remaining value in the transparent transaction value pool of a coinbase transaction is destroyed.

https://zips.z.cash/protocol/protocol.pdf#transactions

```suggestion

### Coinbase Transactions

Any excess miner fee/reward is sent to the ZSF.

Coinbase transactions which use pre-Sustainability Fund transaction versions implicitly have the `ZSF_BALANCE` field set to the value of any unspent miner fee and miner reward.

#### Consensus Rule Changes

-  The remaining value in the transparent transaction value pool of a coinbase transaction is **deposited in the sustainability fund**.
```

The detailed transaction consensus rules also need to be changed, but that change can be made by the ZIP editors if this ZIP is accepted.

### `ZSF_DEPOSIT` Requirements

> - There MUST be only one `ZSF_DEPOSIT` field per transaction

Reviewer: This is redundant if we specify the field is in the transaction header:
https://github.com/zcash/zips/pull/703/files#r1296519401

> - There MUST be only one `ZSF_DEPOSIT` field per transaction

Reviewer: This is redundant if we specify the field is in the transaction header:
https://github.com/zcash/zips/pull/703/files#r1296519401

```suggestion
```

> - ZIP 225 [3] MUST be updated to include `ZSF_DEPOSIT`. ZIP 244 MAY be updated as well.

Reviewer: ZIP 244 must be updated to put the `ZSF_BALANCE` fields in the transaction ID, because a change in the deposit value changes the effects of a transaction.

Reviewer 2: Actually it is ZIP 230 (#687), i.e. the proposed v6 format ZIP, that needs to be updated.

Nitpick: MUST and MAY should only be used for requirements on implementors, not for TODOs about how to modify other ZIPs (since this is not a Process ZIP).

Reviewer: This requirement might be easier to read if there's one line for each ZIP that needs updating.

> - Separate programming language implementations (C++, Rust, etc) MUST guarantee that the calculations described above are consistent

Reviewer: This requirement is already part of the Zcash specification node consensus rules.
```suggestion
```

# Rationale

All technical decisions in this ZIP are balanced between the necessary robustness of the ZSF mechanics, and simplicity of implementation. 

## `ZSF_BALANCE` as node state

Tracking the `ZSF_BALANCE` value as a node state using the above formula is very simple in terms of implementation, and should work correctly given that the node implementations calculate the value according to the specifications.

### Alternative: `ZSF_BALANCE` as block header commitment

> An alternative to node state could be to include the `ZSF_BALANCE` field as a block header and require a block header commitment.

Reviewer: TODO for the next ZIP editors meeting: new block header fields and block commitments are actually two separate things.

> ### Alternative: `ZSF_BALANCE` as block header commitment
> 
> An alternative to node state could be to include the `ZSF_BALANCE` field as a block header and require a block header commitment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Committing to `ZsfBalanceAfter` in the block header

The `ZsfBalanceAfter` node state has a block header commitment as specified above.
```

Requiring block-header-rooted commitments of global fund balances such as the Sustainability Fund ensures that any consensus deviating bugs in accounting of this balance are immediately detected in the earliest impacted block. It also removes some of the need for explorer sites and other analytics services from tracking this value independently, assuming the committed value is made available by common APIs. This helps ensure that all explorers track and report the correct value.

## `ZSF_DEPOSIT` as explicit transaction field

> An explicit value distinguishes the ZEC destined to Sustainability Fund deposits from the implicit transaction fee. Explicitness also ensures any arithmetic flaws in any implementations are more likely to be observed and caught immediately.

Reviewer 2: This is where the alternative of a convention on unspendable outputs should be documented, with rationale on why we're not doing it.

> 

Reviewer: Some commitments start in the activation block, and some in the block after, so we need to be precise here.

```suggestion

# Deployment

This ZIP is proposed to activate with Network Upgrade (TODO ZIP editors).

The `ZsfBalanceAfter` node state commitment will be included in the `hashBlockCommitments` chain starting with the network upgrade activation block.
```

# References

**[1]: [Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement Levels](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc2119.html)**

**[2]: [ZIP 200: Network Upgrade Mechanism](https://zips.z.cash/zip-0200)**

> **[3]: [ZIP 225: Version 5 Transaction Format](https://zips.z.cash/zip-0225)**

Reviewer 2: Make sure that references are complete.

```

> ZIP: 

Reviewer 4: Assigned ZIP 233.

Reviewer 3: Fixed in 5c19898

Title: Establish the Zcash Sustainability Fund on the Protocol Level
Owners: Jason McGee <jason@shieldedlabs.com>
        Mark Henderson <mark@equilibrium.co>
        Tomek Piotrowski <tomek@eiger.co>

>         Mariusz Pilarek <mariusz@eiger.co>

Reviewer 4: The ZIP editors would like to reconfirm whether these are still the active owners of the ZIP:
- [ ] Jason McGee
- [ ] @aphelionz
- [ ] @tomekpiotrowski
- [ ] Mariusz Pilarek

Reviewer 3: I'm happy to stay as owner

Author: The rest are also active owners.

"`MAX_MONEY`" is the ZEC supply cap. For simplicity, this ZIP defines it to be `21,000,000 ZEC`, although this is slightly larger than the actual supply cap of the original ZEC issuance mechanism.

# Abstract 

This ZIP describes the motivation, the necessary changes for, and the implementation specifications for the Zcash Sustainability Fund (ZSF). The ZSF is a proposed alteration to the block rewards system and accounting of unmined ZEC that allows for other sources of funding besides unissued ZEC. This new mechanism for deposits -- that new applications or protocol designs can use to strengthen the long-term sustainability of the network -- will likely be an important step for future economic upgrades, such as a transition to Proof of Stake or Zcash Shielded Assets, and other potential protocol fees and user applications.

The changes in this ZIP are ultimately minimal, only requiring for the node to track state in the form of a `ZSF_BALANCE`, and for a new transaction field to be added, called `ZSF_DEPOSIT`. While wallet developer would be encouraged to add the `ZSF_DEPOSIT` field to their UIs, no changes or new behavior are absolutely required for developers or ZEC holders.

> This ZIP does not change the current ZEC issuance schedule. Any additional amounts paid into the sustainability fund are reserved for use in future ZIPs.

Reviewer 3: Fixed in adb46fb

    - Miner is rewarded via Transaction fees `(inputs - outputs)`, **where `outputs` includes the `ZSF_DEPOSIT` amount**

For example, an end-user wallet application could have an option to contribute a portion of a transaction to the ZSF, which would be included in a `ZSF_DEPOSIT` field in the transaction, to be taken into account by the Zcash nodes.

This quite simple alteration has -- in our opinion -- a multitude of benefits:

1. **Long Term Consensus Sustainability:** This mechanism supports long-term consensus sustainability by addressing concerns about the sustainability of the network design shared by Bitcoin-like systems through the establishment of deposits into the Sustainability Fund to augment block rewards, ensuring long-term sustainability as the issuance rate of Zcash drops and newly issued ZEC decreases over time.
2. **Benefits to ZEC Holders:** Deposits to the ZSF slow down the payout of ZEC, temporarily reducing its available supply, benefiting current holders of unencumbered active ZEC in proportion to their holdings without requiring them to opt into any scheme, introducing extra risk, active oversight, or accounting complexity.

> 3. **Recovery of "Soft-Burned" Funds:** In some instances, such as miners not claim all available rewards, some ZEC goes unaccounted for though not formally burned. This proposal would recover it through the `ZSF_BALANCE` mechanism described below.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
3. **Recovery of "Soft-Burned" Funds:** In some instances, such as miners not claiming all available rewards, some ZEC goes unaccounted for, though not formally burned. This proposal would recover it through the `ZSF_BALANCE` mechanism described below.
```

# Specification

In practice, The Zcash Sustainability Fund is a single global balance maintained by the node state and contributed to via a single transaction field. This provides the economic and security support described in the motivation section, while also importantly keeping the fund payouts extremely simple to describe and implement.

The two modifications are:
1. The re-accounting of unmined ZEC as a node state field called `ZSF_BALANCE`
2. The addition of a transaction field called `ZSF_DEPOSIT`

## `ZSF_BALANCE`

The ZEC issuance mechanism is re-defined to remove funds from `ZSF_BALANCE`, which is initially set to `MAX_MONEY` at the genesis block.

Consensus nodes are then required to track new per-block state:

- `ZSF_BALANCE[H] : u64 [zatoshi]`

The state is a single 64 bit integer (representing units of `zatoshi`) at any given block height, ``H``, representing the Sustainability Fund balance at that height, ``H``. The `ZSF_BALANCE` can be calculated using the following formula:

> `ZsfBalanceAfter(height) = MAX_MONEY + sum_{h = 0}^{height} (ZsfDeposit(height) + Unclaimed(height) - BlockSubsidy(height))`

Reviewer 4: Bug: The sum is ignoring the sum variable and is instead repeatedly counting the last block in the range.
```suggestion
`ZsfBalanceAfter(height) = MAX_MONEY + sum_{h = 0}^{height} (ZsfDeposit(h) + Unclaimed(h) - BlockSubsidy(h))`
```

Reviewer 4: The ZIP Editors had a not-insubstantial discussion about off-by-one errors, and decided that it would be useful to define `ZsfBalanceDelta(height)` as the change in the ZSF balance as a result of applying the block at `height` to the chain consensus state. Then other values can be derived from this in a way that more closely matches how full nodes will actually implement it:
```
ZsfBalanceBefore(height) = MAX_MONEY if height == 0 else ZsfBalanceAfter(height - 1)
ZsfBalanceAfter(height) = ZsfBalanceBefore(height) + ZsfBalanceDelta(height)
```

```
ZIP: 
Title: Establish the Zcash Sustainability Fund on the Protocol Level
Owners: Jason McGee <jason@shieldedlabs.com>
        Mark Henderson <mark@equilibrium.co>
        Tomek Piotrowski <tomek@eiger.co>
        Mariusz Pilarek <mariusz@eiger.co>
Original-Authors: Nathan Wilcox
Credits:
Status: Draft
Category: Ecosystem
Created: 2023-08-
License: BSD-2-Clause
```

# Terminology

The key words "MUST", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "MAY", "RECOMMENDED", "OPTIONAL", and "REQUIRED" in this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119. [1]

The term "network upgrade" in this document is to be interpreted as described in ZIP 200. [2]

The term "Block Rewards" refers to the algorithmic

> issuance of ZEC to every block's creator -- part of the consensus rules.

Reviewer: This is slightly incorrect and should be replaced with the correct definition from: https://github.com/zcash/zips/pull/706/files#r1333620406

Reviewer 3: Fixed, I will update the definitions to reference these in the other PRs

3. **Recovery of "Soft-Burned" Funds:** In some instances, such as miners not claim all available rewards, some ZEC goes unaccounted for though not formally burned. This proposal would recover it through the `ZSF_BALANCE` mechanism described below.

# Specification

In practice, The Zcash Sustainability Fund is a single global balance maintained by the node state and contributed to via a single transaction field. This provides the economic and security support described in the motivation section, while also importantly keeping the fund payouts extremely simple to describe and implement.

The two modifications are:
1. The re-accounting of unmined ZEC as a node state field called `ZSF_BALANCE`
2. The addition of a transaction field called `ZSF_DEPOSIT`

## `ZSF_BALANCE`

The ZEC issuance mechanism is re-defined to remove funds from `ZSF_BALANCE`, which is initially set to `MAX_MONEY` at the genesis block.

Consensus nodes are then required to track new per-block state:

> - `ZSF_BALANCE[H] : u64 [zatoshi]`

Reviewer: Format questions for ZIP Editors:
- should this be `ZSF_BALANCE_AFTER[h]` for consistency with the function `ZsfBalanceAfter(h)`?
- are the similar names too confusing?
- is the missing `_AFTER` potentially ambiguous?

This change would need to apply to the whole document.

```toml
- `ZSF_BALANCE_AFTER[H] : u64 [zatoshi]`
```

The state is a single 64 bit integer (representing units of `zatoshi`) at any given block height, ``H``, representing the Sustainability Fund balance at that height, ``H``. The `ZSF_BALANCE` can be calculated using the following formula:

`ZsfBalanceAfter(height) = MAX_MONEY + sum_{h = 0}^{height} (ZsfDeposit(height) + Unclaimed(height) - BlockSubsidy(height))`

> where `Unclaimed(height)` is the portion of the block subsidy that is unclaimed for the block at the given height. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
where `Unclaimed(height)` is the portion of the block subsidy and miner fees that is unclaimed for the block at the given height. 
```

```

> ZIP: 

Reviewer: TODO ZIP Editors: Assign a ZIP number so that this ZIP can be referenced in PR #706.

Title: Establish the Zcash Sustainability Fund on the Protocol Level

> Owners: Jason McGee <jason@shieldedlabs.com>
>         Mark Henderson <mark@equilibrium.co>
>         Tomek Piotrowski <tomek@eiger.co>
>         Mariusz Pilarek <mariusz@eiger.co>
> Original-Authors: Nathan Wilcox
> Credits: Nathan Wilcox
>          Mark Henderson
>          Jason McGee
>          Tomek Piotrowski
>          Mariusz Pilarek

Reviewer: Formatting: In general there is no need to duplicate ZIP Owners, Original-Authors, and Credits, unless you intend to remove owners later.

This also applies to #706.

```suggestion
Owners: Jason McGee <jason@shieldedlabs.com>
        Mark Henderson <mark@equilibrium.co>
        Tomek Piotrowski <tomek@eiger.co>
        Mariusz Pilarek <mariusz@eiger.co>
Original-Authors: Nathan Wilcox
Credits:
```

Status: Draft
Category: Ecosystem

> Created: 2023-08-

Reviewer: Format: missing date

```suggestion
Created: 2023-08-
```

Reviewer 3: Fixed 👍

License: BSD-2-Clause
```

# Terminology

The key words "MUST", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "MAY", "RECOMMENDED", "OPTIONAL", and "REQUIRED" in this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119. [1]

The term "network upgrade" in this document is to be interpreted as described in ZIP 200. [2]

The term "Block Rewards" refers to the algorithmic
issuance of ZEC to every block's creator -- part of the consensus rules.

"Issuance" - The method by which unmined or unissued ZEC is converted to ZEC available to users of the network

"We" - the ZIP authors, owners listed in the above front matter

"`MAX_MONEY`" is the ZEC supply cap. For simplicity, this ZIP defines it to be `21,000,000 ZEC`, although this is slightly larger than the actual supply cap of the original ZEC issuance mechanism.

# Abstract 

> This ZIP describes the motivation, the necessary changes for, and the implementation specifications for the Zcash Sustainability Fund (ZSF). The ZSF is a proposed alteration to the block rewards system and accounting of unmined ZEC that allows for other sources of funding besides unissued ZEC. This new mechanism for deposits -- that new applications or protocol designs can use to strengthen the long-term sustainability of the network  -- will likely be an important step for future economic upgrades, such as a transition to Proof of Stake or Zcash Shielded Assets, and other potential protocol fees and user applications.

Reviewer: Formatting: extra space

```suggestion
This ZIP describes the motivation, the necessary changes for, and the implementation specifications for the Zcash Sustainability Fund (ZSF). The ZSF is a proposed alteration to the block rewards system and accounting of unmined ZEC that allows for other sources of funding besides unissued ZEC. This new mechanism for deposits -- that new applications or protocol designs can use to strengthen the long-term sustainability of the network -- will likely be an important step for future economic upgrades, such as a transition to Proof of Stake or Zcash Shielded Assets, and other potential protocol fees and user applications.
```

This ZIP does not change the current ZEC issuance schedule. Any additional amounts paid into the sustainability fund are reserved for use in future ZIPs.

# Motivation

The Zcash network's operation and development relies fundamentally on the block reward system inherited from Bitcoin. This system currently looks like this:

- At Every New Block:
    - Miner and funding streams are rewarded a constant amount via unissued ZEC (this constant amount halves at specified heights)
    - Miner is rewarded via Transaction fees `(inputs - outputs)`

The Zcash Sustainability Fund is a proposed replacement to that payout mechanism, with the relevant parts in *bold* below:

- **Unmined ZEC is now accounted for as `ZSF_BALANCE`**
- **Transaction includes optional contributions to ZSF via a `ZSF_DEPOSIT` field**
- Thus, at Every New Block:
    - Miner and funding streams rewarded the same constant amount, **but from `ZSF_BALANCE`** (this constant amount still halves at specified heights)

>     - Miner is rewarded via Transaction fees `(inputs - outputs)`, **including the `ZSF_DEPOSIT` amount**

Reviewer: This is ambiguous, because it could mean that the miner gets the `ZSF_DEPOSIT`.

```suggestion
    - Miner is rewarded via Transaction fees `(inputs - outputs)`, **where `outputs` includes the `ZSF_DEPOSIT` amount**
```

> This design gives similar clarity and algorithmic control benefits, while also allowing other sources of funds for Block Rewards in addition to newly issued ZEC, via ZSF Deposits.
> 

Reviewer: This is already mentioned in point 1 below.

In general, we discourage specification authors from duplicating the same ideas, because each duplicate needs to be reviewed for consistency. (And if there's a change, each duplicate needs to be changed.)

```suggestion
```

For example, an end-user wallet application could have an option to contribute a portion of a transaction to the ZSF, which would be included in a `ZSF_DEPOSIT` field in the transaction, to be taken into account by the Zcash nodes.

> 
> This quite simple alternation has -- in our opinion -- a multitude of benefits:

Reviewer: This looks like a misspelling? (And also a redundant newline.)

> a situation in which one thing repeatedly happens or exists after another
> Example: _Flowers and trees are planted to produce an attractive alternation of light and shade in the garden._

https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/alternation

```suggestion

This quite simple alteration has -- in our opinion -- a multitude of benefits:
```

2. **Benefits to ZEC Holders:** Deposits to the ZSF slow down the payout of ZEC, temporarily reducing its available supply, benefiting current holders of unencumbered active ZEC in proportion to their holdings without requiring them to opt into any scheme, introducing extra risk, active oversight, or accounting complexity.
3. **Recovery of "Soft-Burned" Funds:** In some instances, such as miners not claim all available rewards, some ZEC goes unaccounted for though not formally burned. This proposal would recover it through the `ZSF_BALANCE` mechanism described below.

# Specification

In practice, The Zcash Sustainability Fund is a single global balance maintained by the node state and contributed to via a single transaction field. This provides the economic and security support described in the motivation section, while also importantly keeping the fund payouts extremely simple to describe and implement.

The two modifications are:
1. The re-accounting of unmined ZEC as a node state field called `ZSF_BALANCE`
2. The addition of a transaction field called `ZSF_DEPOSIT`

> 
> Please note that a **network upgrade is required** for this work to be fully implemented.

Reviewer: This is already described in the "Deployment" section, so it doesn't need to be mentioned here as well.

```suggestion
```

### Committing to `ZsfBalanceAfter` in the block header

The `ZsfBalanceAfter` node state has a block header commitment as specified above.

Requiring block-header-rooted commitments of global fund balances such as the Sustainability Fund ensures that any consensus deviating bugs in accounting of this balance are immediately detected in the earliest impacted block. It also removes some of the need for explorer sites and other analytics services from tracking this value independently, assuming the committed value is made available by common APIs. This helps ensure that all explorers track and report the correct value.

## `ZSF_DEPOSIT` as explicit transaction field

An explicit value distinguishes the ZEC destined to Sustainability Fund deposits from the implicit transaction fee. Explicitness also ensures any arithmetic flaws in any implementations are more likely to be observed and caught immediately.

# Deployment

This ZIP is proposed to activate with Network Upgrade (TODO ZIP editors).

> The `ZsfBalanceAfter` node state commitment will be included in the `hashBlockCommitments` chain starting with the network upgrade activation block.

Reviewer: Formatting: missing newline

```suggestion
The `ZsfBalanceAfter` node state commitment will be included in the `hashBlockCommitments` chain starting with the network upgrade activation block.

```
